Combat: Evaluate
[[Category:GURPS Combat]]
This maneuver is the melee combat equivalent of Aim. It lets you take time to study an adversary in order to gain a combat bonus on a subsequent attack. You must specify one visible opponent who is close enough to attack unarmed or with a ready melee weapon, or whom you could reach with a single Move and Attack maneuver. You are sizing him up and looking for the right moment to strike.
An Evaluate maneuver gives you +1 to skill for the purpose of an Attack, Feint, All-Out Attack, or Move and Attack made against that opponent, on your next turn only. You may take multiple, consecutive Evaluate maneuvers before you strike, giving a cumulative +1 per turn, to a maximum of +3.

Evaluate provides exactly the same benefits for Committed Attack and Defensive Attack that it does for the maneuvers listed on pp. B364-365. In combat-heavy campaigns – like most Martial Arts games – the GM may want to use the following optional rules.


Movement: Step.
Active Defense: Any. This does not spoil your evaluation.


===Countering Feints and Deceptive Attacks===
If you’re watching your opponent’s rhythm and movements in order to get a clear shot at him, you’re more likely to notice everything he’s doing – including his actions toward you! At the GM’s option, you may use your current Evaluate bonus against a foe to cancel out defense penalties from any feint or Deceptive Attack he attempts against you. This can never give a net bonus. For instance, if you’ve taken two turns of Evaluate (for +2 to skill) when your foe launches a Deceptive Attack that gives you -4 to defend, you would defend at only -2.
This applies only to Deceptive Attacks and feints that occur while you’re taking the Evaluate maneuver, and only negates penalties to defend against that one foe. Once you make an attack on him and claim your Evaluate bonus, you lose this side benefit until you Evaluate again.


===Evaluate and Non-Combat Skills===
If you’re paying close attention to one person on the battlefield, you’re more likely to notice anything unusual or dangerous about him. Apply your current Evaluate bonus to IQ rolls to notice him playing tricks on you (see Dirty Tricks, p. B405); Body Language rolls to determine whether he’s nervous, on drugs, Berserk, etc.; Expert Skill (Hoplology) rolls to identify his martial-arts style; and Observation rolls to spot Supernatural Features, concealed weapons, and other “interesting” items. This applies only while you Evaluate.