Combat: Aim
[[Category:GURPS Combat]]
This is a full-turn maneuver used to aim a ranged weapon (or a device such as a camera or telescope). You must choose a specific target. You can’t aim at something that you can’t see or otherwise detect.
Specify the weapon you’re aiming with and your target. If you follow an Aim maneuver with an Attack or All- Out Attack with the same weapon against the same target, you get a bonus to hit. Add the weapon’s Accuracy (Acc) to your skill, plus any bonuses for targeting systems used: sights, targeting computers, etc.
If you brace a firearm or crossbow, you get an extra +1 to Acc. A firearm or crossbow is braced if you can rest it on a sandbag, low wall, car, etc. A onehanded firearm (e.g., a pistol) is considered braced if used two-handed. A two-handed firearm (e.g., a rifle) is considered braced if you are prone and using a bipod.
If you Aim for more than one second, you receive an additional bonus: +1 for two seconds of Aim, or +2 for three or more seconds.
Your combined bonus from all targeting systems (scopes, sights, computers, etc.) cannot exceed the weapon’s base Accuracy. For instance, if you add a telescopic sight that gives +4 Acc to a pistol with Acc 2, the bonus is +2, not +4.
You can take an Aim maneuver to improve your odds with Rapid Fire with Thrown Weapons (p. 120) or Rapid Strike with Thrown Weapons (pp. 120- 121). You must declare which opponent you’re aiming at. Your aiming bonuses (for Accuracy, turns of Aim, etc.) only apply to attacks against that one foe, regardless of how many attacks or shots you have. For a Rapid Strike, apply the Accuracy of each weapon separately to its own attack roll.
A warrior with the Heroic Archer advantage generally gets his weapon’s Accuracy bonus without an Aim maneuver – see p. 45 for details. If he chooses to Aim, he gets a further +1 for the first second of Aim, or +2 for two or more seconds of Aim.

Movement: Step. Exception: You cannot step if using a braced, twohanded weapon.
Active Defense: Any, but you automatically spoil your aim and lose all accumulated benefits. If you are injured while aiming, you must make a Will roll or lose your aim.