Combat: Feint
[[Category:GURPS Combat]]
“Fake” a melee attack. You cannot Feint someone unless you could have hit him with a melee attack – that is, your weapon is ready and your foe is within reach. This maneuver is not an attack, though, and does not make your weapon unready.
When you Feint, roll a Quick Contest of Melee Weapon skills with your foe; if either of you is unarmed, you may roll against an unarmed combat skill instead. Your opponent may opt to roll against Cloak or Shield skill, if he is suitably equipped and this would give him a better roll. If his DX is better than his combat skills, he may roll against DX instead.
If you fail your roll, your Feint is unsuccessful. Likewise, if you succeed, but your foe succeeds by as much as or more than you do, your Feint fails.
If you make your roll, and your foe fails, subtract your margin of success from the foe’s active defense if you attack him with Attack, All-Out Attack, or Move and Attack on your next turn. For instance, if your skill is 15 and you roll a 12, your foe defends against you at -3 next turn.
If you and your foe both succeed, but you succeed by more, subtract your margin of victory from the foe’s defense. For instance, if your skill is 15 and you roll a 10 (success by 5), and your foe’s skill is 14 and he rolls 12 (success by 2), you win by 3, so he will defend at -3 if your next maneuver is to attack him.
You cannot Feint if your foe is unable to observe you! However, if your foe runs away, turns his back on you, or loses sight of you in some way after you successfully Feint, he will still suffer his defense penalty if you attack him on your next turn. If you lose track of the foe, or cannot attack him next turn, your foe’s defense penalty vanishes.
A Feint is good for one second! But if you Feint and then make an All-Out Attack (Double), the feint applies to both attacks.
In all cases, your allies cannot take advantage of your Feint. The defense penalty applies only to your next attack.
Shield Feints: After you have attacked your foe once by striking with your shield (see p. 406), you may also Feint with your shield, rolling against Shield skill.

A fighter’s ability to notice and react to trickery in combat is realistically a question of experience. It has little to do with the weapon he happens to have in hand! If the GM doesn’t mind a little added complexity, he should consider allowing all combatants to resist (but not initiate) feints using their best Melee Weapon or unarmed combat skill.
Example: Baajikiil the spear-master, having snapped off his spear in a foe’s sternum, hastily snatches up his enemy’s mace. He knows Spear at 18 but must wield the mace at default Axe/Mace skill . . . a paltry 8. He still has his trusty shield, which he uses at his Shield skill of 16. If he tries to feint, he rolls at 8 with the mace or 16 with the shield – his Spear skill doesn’t help. However, if he resists a feint, he does so at skill 18. He might not know much about hitting people with a mace, but he’s a veteran fighter and won’t be easy to fool!
By the same token, those who know any specialty of the Feint technique (p. 73) may use it to resist feints as well as to execute them. Their knowledge of combat deceptions makes them much less likely to fall for such tricks.

Movement: Step.
Active Defense: Any. However, if you Feint and then parry with an unbalanced weapon, you cannot attack on your next turn, making your Feint pointless.