Eorith Magic
[[Category:Cosmology]]
Manifold Casters make up an insignificant portion of Eorithian society, mostly they keep their powers secret. The Mortal Gods frown upon the use of Manifold magic by anyone but the Gods themselves, although casters get by without evoking their wrath. 
There are 4 Manifolds that make up the the Asherin Cosmos, these are more commonly known as Volts or Folds; Rithvolt, Ghatamvolt, Tharimvolt and Sharothvolt. Each is a phenomenon that exists in the same space as each other. Each Volt warps and twists relative to each other, but stay uniform to locals within their respective Volt. Different extremetities in the various Volts are the explantion to various natural phenomenon, such as the wind and waves, volcanoes and the celestial bodies that travel over Eorith at night.

Rithvolt is the Volt of space, it defines volumes and distances

Ghatamvolt is the Volt of life, it defines creatures and plants

Tharimvolt is the Volt of energy, it moves the wind and creates the sun and winter

Sharothvolt is the Volt of intangible, it defines knowledge, time and the mysterious


Manifold casters effectively pull, push, twist and fold the Volts together to change reality, it is the same magic that was used to produce Eorith in the first place, and holds a great power to those who master the different realms. 

Folktales usually treat Manifold casters as antagonists, although the Volts rarely cause evil actions. They are considered trouble makers, change isn't welcome, and the casters usually form underground cells to pass on their knowledge to others with similar ambitions. Satin, the Knight of Iolathorm started a cell called the White Knights of Satin, to pass on his studies in the combinations between Ghatamvolt and Tharimvolt. Satin was able to summon great frosty beasts of tooth and claw, able to spew forth gales and thrash at enemies with icicle claws. After his death, his cell endured and are a respected, but feared force in Eorith.

Manifold Casters use Realm-based syntactic magic. Mana as such isn’t a concern, but Magery (Syntactic) is a prerequisite for magic use, and is always inborn or developed in the early years of ones life – players can’t purchase Magery 0 after character creation. Casters occasionally manage to sharpen their powers by practice, advancing from lower levels to Magery 3, but never higher. The few, legendary Magery 4 wizards are born with that power, and once their capabilities become clear to themselves, most become megalomaniacs only to find themselves hunted by the Mortal Gods. Magery adds to Realm skill.

As each Realm deals with a major portion of reality, casters develop a strong understanding of how the universe works. Science is a magic in Asherin, and the Manifold casters are the masters of the various sciences. Its rare for a Caster to find a trainee or master unless he or she finds a cell. Most cells will only teach realms their founder employed, and usually have a manifesto which the members live by. Free spirited Manifold casters who do no want to follow strict regimes do not need to join a Volt Cell, but do so at the cost of having no training.

==Realms==

Each Realm is divided into six levels:
*Level 1: Detection and Assessment.
*Level 2: Control and Diversion.
*Level 3: Command and Simple Creation.
*Level 4: Authority.
*Level 5: Complete Power

There are twelve available Realms:
;Fauna: This realm allows control over the manifold to invoke the essence of Ghatam-volt, most specifically, the metaphysically perfect animals that dwell there. This allows them to affect Eorithian animals, their bi-products, such as leather and ivory, and the ability to call Ghatam-volt beasts through the fold. What this realm doesn't allow is the ability to affect humans and other species not originating from Ghatam-volt, including all sentient races created by the mortal gods (Asbjorn, Kozelrodians).
;Ecdysozoa/Feithid-volt/Kryp-volt: For every beast on Ghatam-volt (mammals, birds, reptiles etc.) there is a species of arthropods, molluscs and nemotodes. This realm allows Manifold casters to affect Eorithian creatures of these types, their bi-products and the ability to call Ghatam-volt crawlers through the fold.
;Flaura: The final realm governed by Ghatam-volt is that of Flaura. Those casters that wish to affect Eorithian plants can do so via Ghatam-volt's vegetation. All plants, dead and alive, are affected by this realm. This realm also delves into poisons and toxins found on both Eorith and Ghatam-volt.
;Solid - Jord-volt/Boden-volt/Ddaear-volt/Defold-volt: Many fold-masters attempt to tap the strength of Tharim-volt. The soil of Eorith is rich in folds of Tharim-volt's earthen essence. The realm allows affection of Eorithian soil, the base metals and stone. It does not allow the ability to affect formed crystals, such as those that make up the nodes. These are the pure metaphysical representations of Tharim-volt, fire, water, air, earth and light. One may use these crystals to fuel Manifold magic.
;Liquid - Vatten/Eis/Dŵriâ /Jég: The swirling mass of Tharimvolt sustains the flat seas of Eorith with water. It infuses the clouds and solidifies in glaiciers. Those who invest in this realm can affect water, and other liquids similar to water, such as acids and alcohol. This also allows control over the varying states of  water, in solid and gaseous form.  	 
;Heat - Hetta/Sonne/Haul/Forróság: Within the swirling mass of Tharimvolt, pockets of heat bubble, blaze and bake. Manifold casters can affect permeations of heat within Eorith. They can heat, begin fires and turn stone to lava. They also have the ability to remove heat, cooling water to ice, and quenching fires with a quick temperature change.
;Waves - Vädra/Luft/Awyr/Szél: Tharimvolt isn't purely mass, energy ripples through it with amzing force, only glimpses of this raw power are seen on Eorith, wind, waves and earthquakes are simple affectations for Manifold casters. The mortal gods can use this realm to create hurricanes and move mountains. 
;Light - : The last element of Tharimvolt is light. Quite closely tied to heat, light is something Manifold casters can add and substract, allowing people to see at night, or makeing a courtyard pitch black during the day. More masterful casters can conjure images of beings that don't exist, purely by bending the light and sculpting illusary tricks.
;Transverse/Manifold: This realm is the closest to affecting the manifold of Rithvolt, although it sits within Sharothvolt. THe transverse realm allows the warping of Rithvolt, such as the moving of two points together, to create long distance messages, or possibly teleportation. It is alos the realm reuired to bring other beings from the other reals into rithvolt, and is a contant force to maintain them in the seperate pfold. 
;Spirit: Manifold casters who wish to affect sentience in Eorith tap into Sharothvolt, the fold that controls that which is not phyiscal. Sentient thoughts can be manipulated, created and destroyed within this realm, one can talk to the deceased and bind one creatures soul into anothers. Most things considered unatural spawn from the depths of Sharothvolt.
;Time: Sharothvolt rarely warps along Eoriths manifold, creating an steady time balance. Manifold casters can warp this locally to incease or decrease time periods, heal wounds. They cannot use this to travel back or forward in time. Although messages and items could be sent by some of the more powerful casters.
;Knowledge: Sharothvolt is what quantifies knowledge, and the metaphysical idea of knowledge is a magic in itself. Tomes are considered as concetrated folds of Sharothvolt, and scholars are focusing the fold for insight. This realm allows casters to summon unknown information, assess it and measure  quantifiable elements. 

This schema has three significant gaps. First, the Mortal Gods are the only beings able to achieve full ranks in any of the realms, they are considered the guardians of reality on Eorith and will hunt down those who misuse manifold magic. Second, any mineral that is powerful enough to become a node, and be made into a node compass cannot be affected by Manifold magic - although they can be used to fuel spells. Finally, healing magic can’t accomplish anything beyond the scope of natural processes apart from speeding these considerably.
Each level within a Realm costs 10 points.

''Ancient Stragric''
''Bargeron's Vernacular''

==Parameter Effects==

Parameters affect magic-working as follows:
*Range and familiarity, range in time, damage, and healing generate skill penalties.
*Area of effect, changes to personal abilities, and weight affected modify energy cost.
*Casting against multiple targets generates skill penalties and increases energy cost.
*Base duration of an effect is determined by margin of success. Extended workings aren’t permitted, but it’s possible to maintain a continuing effect for increments of the same duration by spending additional energy equal to half the original casting cost per increment.

There’s no “spirit world” as such. Spirits and gods are
beings that dwell in the same physical world as everyone else.