GURPS Thaumatology
[[Category:GURPS Reference]]

=REALMS=

The second type of syntactic magic divides the magical
universe into Realms, and focuses on the degree of power
the magician possesses over each Realm. To compare this
approach to the verb-noun model: Realms are quite similar
to nouns (although some define methods and effects as
much as they define things), while the magician’s level of
power in a Realm identifies the verbs available to him.
However, Realm-using casters don’t have to worry about
the exact magical description of their intended effect – only
whether they have the power to accomplish it. For an
example of a Realm-based magic system, see [[Oceanic Magic]]
(pp. 232-233).

==More Levels: Lower and Higher Mysteries==

Having more levels per Realm allows finer subdivisions
and greater subtlety – although too much subtlety may lead
to confusion and arguments about exactly what each level
can accomplish. The question of exactly how many levels
are “enough” is left to the GM’s judgment, but anything
beyond six is probably too complex. One possible structure:

Level 1: Detection and Measurement. This is much the
same as level 1 in the three-level system discussed above,
but strictly limited to passive sensing.

Level 2: Control and Diversion. The magician has limited
control over anything that falls within the Realm. This
includes the ability to encourage its natural growth and to
calm it, but not to create it or suppress it much below its
natural level. Weather/2 might allow a ship’s wizard to save
the vessel from being blown onto rocks by turning the
winds around a few points, and maybe stopping them from
growing much worse, but the ship would still have to run
before the wind until it blows itself out. Objects can only be
reshaped within their natural limits, although perhaps a little
faster than usual; wood warps naturally, so Plants/2
could make a door twist loose from its frame in a few minutes.
Likewise, ghosts are always bound by rules and
restrictions, so it’s not hard for a wizard with
Necromancy/2 to create a barrier that prevents them from
entering a room. If a force or a power permeates the entire
universe, then level 2 in the associated Realm permits its
exploitation in straightforward ways. The magician’s person
and identity may be easier to manipulate than something
external; Health/2 might, with GM permission, let the
user heal his own minor wounds, but not regenerate lost
limbs or help others.

Level 3: Command and Simple Creation. With substantial
control over the Realm on a local level, the magician can
call up things that might exist, make them go away, repair
them, or change their appearance or capabilities. This also
permits the creation of simple manifestations of the Realm.
The GM decides what’s “simple,” but while a lightning bolt
or a rock should qualify, and a tree or an insect might, a living
person certainly won’t. Humanity/3 might, however,
grant the ability to heal (or inflict) wounds, influence someone
else’s emotions and thoughts, and cause the nearest
human beings to approach. Likewise, Motion/3 could grant
the power of flight, or Magic/3 could enable the user to dispel
most other magics by suppressing their magical nature.

Level 4: Authority. Anything that lies within the Realm is
open to command, and the magician can create all but the
most complex manifestations of this aspect of reality. He
can also negate use of lesser levels of the same Realm by
commanding that working’s subject not to be affected.
Decay/4 might let him not only cause the destruction of
anything that’s subject to decline (living or not), but also
make something that has already decayed work “as new” by
suppressing all consequences of the decay. Biology/4 might
enable him to change the sex of living things, make them
physically older or younger, or grant them special abilities
borrowed from other, similar species.

Level 5: Complete Power. At this level, the magician’s
control of the Realm appears more-or-less complete. He
can turn it off or on, perform the most radical transformations
(although he may need access to another Realm for
this; e.g., turning a tree into a horse might require not
only Plant/5 but also Animal/4), or create the most complex
forms from nothing (albeit still subject to any fundamental
rules of magic concerning permanent creations).
He can also remove or change individual features of the
target, often in complex ways. For example, Image/5
might permit him to make someone appear to be a man
to one observer, a horse to another, and invisible to a third
– simultaneously.
Level 6: Transcend Limitations. This is a legendary level
of power over the Realm, achieved by few mortals. It could
be nothing more than a wild rumor, or achieving it may be
the lifetime ambition of every wizard. The GM is free to
require large Unusual Backgrounds for PCs who wish to
attain it. Essentially, an expert can adjust the nature of the
Realm itself, at least locally. Energy/6 might permit a magician
to turn electricity into a purple liquid, while Love/6
might make indifference into the highest expression of
love. Primarily, though, level 6 in a Realm is the point at
which anything is possible – temporarily, and if the GM
approves. The potential dangers of such power are as great
as the benefits.

==Level Costs==

Power over each Realm is a separate advantage, bought
in levels. The cost per level depends on the breadth of the
Realms, and on how much control each level adds. Some
suggested guidelines for determining this cost:
1. Basic cost per level, in a system that grants complete
control over the Realm at the highest level, is 60 points
divided by the total number of levels per Realm. If magicians
enjoy only partial control over each Realm at the
highest level, then calculate cost as if there were further levels
with similar gradations of power, up to whatever hypothetical
level would grant total control.
2. Decide how many Realms the campaign features.
Include Realms that aren’t widely known to magicians.
3. Assess how much of the universe Realm-based magic
can control – aside from any transcendent or omnipotent
gods – and count how many distinct and substantial
aspects of reality it can’t influence. This judgment is necessarily
subjective, but the GM should have a fair idea how
many problems these weaknesses will cause. Minor flaws
and glitches in the laws of magic don’t count here, but can
justify small cost reductions, or at least rounding down.
4. Add the number of Realms from step 2 to the number
of inaccessible aspects of reality from step 3, and modify the
cost per level from step 1 as follows:

 1-2,   x5
 3-4,   x3
 4-6,   x2
 7-9,   x1
 10-12, x2/3
 13+,   x1/2

==DEFINING EFFECTS==

Having decided what he wants to achieve through a
Realm-based working, the wizard must determine whether he
can accomplish it.

===Appropriate and Multiple Realms===

The main question is which Realm or Realms apply. In
general, this ought to be fairly clear. A Realm-using wizard
should have a good enough idea about his abilities that the
player can simply ask whether something is possible at a given
level. Still, the occasional working will require negotiation and
discussion between player and GM.
Many workings involve more than one Realm. This might
increase range or effective duration, or permit transformations
from one Realm to another (see below). It may also
make the magic harder to counter (see Countermagic, p. 194),
in that an opponent must have power over every Realm used.
However, multiple-Realm workings are inevitably somewhat
harder.


===Transformations===

Effects that transform one thing into another are tricky –
especially if they change the target into something from a
different Realm, which calls for a significant level of power
over both Realms. In general, the caster requires whatever
level permits transformations in the Realm corresponding to
the subject’s current state (this level is campaign-specific, but
invariably high), plus a sufficiently high level in the other
Realm to perform at least minor creations (a suggested minimum:
one level less than the first Realm level, or level 2,
whichever is higher). The GM can assign significant skill
penalties or energy costs for especially radical transformations,
even within a Realm.

===Realms and Damage===

In general, a caster needs at least level 2 in a Realm to use
it to inflict damage, and even level 2 workings (assuming that
higher levels are available) tend to be limited to small, localized
harmful effects: electrical sparks, flammable materials
catching light, nauseating rather than lethal toxicity, and so
on. The GM may rule that such damage is rolled at -1 to -3 per
die, allows the target an attribute roll to avoid it, etc. Level 3+
in Realms such as Energy and Cold can permit more effective
attacks.
Damaging things that fall within the Realm directly –
rather than using the Realm’s power to generate a minor ad
hoc weapon – requires a moderate to high level in the Realm,
or a combined working that includes another, destructive
Realm such as Decay or Death. For example, in a system with
four or five levels per Realm, Plant/3 might serve to shatter a
wooden door; Plant/2 combined with Decay/3 might rot it, so
that it crumbles after a few seconds; and Decay/4 could conjure
pure entropic destruction from nowhere, destroying the
door with a touch.


===Enhanced Damage at High Levels===

Given high levels of control over a Realm, the caster can do
things that fall within it more serious damage, by disrupting
their fundamental nature. A simple general rule: for every level
by which the magician’s power in the Realm exceeds that
required to damage the target, give his attacks +1 damage per
die. Alternatively, the GM may define these attacks as having
an armor divisor of (2), or decree that the injury they inflict
heals more slowly or even not at all unless treated with equally
powerful healing magics.


==PERFORMING THE WORKING==

A Realm-based working always requires a single skill roll,
with the modifiers noted under Parameter Effects (pp. 181-
183), plus those for modified casting time, distraction, etc.
When more than one Realm is involved, use the caster’s lowest
skill in any of them, at -1 per Realm after the first. For
example, a wizard with the skills Thoughts Realm-15 and
Distance Realm-13, trying to communicate telepathically with
someone on another continent by combining the two Realms,
would have an effective skill of 12 before other modifiers. Use
this roll to find any margin of success needed to determine
effects or resistance.

===Energy Cost for Realm-Based Magic===

Base energy cost for Realm-based magic usually equals
twice the level of the highest-level Realm involved, plus the
level of any other Realms used. See also Determining Base
Energy Cost (pp. 180-181).

==REALM-BASED ENCHANTMENT==


A magician who wishes to create a permanent magic
item using Realm-based magic must imbue it with the
Realm’s nature and power. The resulting artifact has one or
more specific functions that a wizard employing the Realm
could perform or enable. This kind of enchantment
requires command of the Realm itself, and may also
require power over one or more additional Realms, such as
Magic (to bind supernatural forces into a new shape) or
Matter (to adjust the object’s structure to hold its new
power). The GM can impose whatever supplementary
requirements he sees fit, as a general rule or in specific
cases – including knowledge of other skills (whether those
related to magical operations or mundane craft skills to
shape the item) and use of special materials.
The enchantment process can use the standard rules for
spell-based magic (see Magic Items, pp. B480-483, and
Enchanting Items, pp. 107-113); either Quick and Dirty or
Slow and Sure enchantment is possible. The enchanter
rolls against the lowest relevant Realm skill, which also
defines the artifact’s Power. His skill with every Realm
involved must therefore be at 15+ if the item is to work in
normal or better mana – or at 20+, if it’s to function in low
mana. The energy cost for this purpose is equal to the sum
of the levels of the Realms involved in the process, multiplied
by 150 if only a mage can use the item, or by 250 if
anyone can use it. If a Realm plays multiple roles in the
enchantment, then count it once per application.
Example: Carbuncle the Barely Sane manufactures an
Amulet of Commanding Giant Ants. The GM rules that
preparing the amulet uses Matter/2 (to transform it to carry
this puissant effect) and Magic/2 (to make it magical); the
actual function requires Insects/3 (to control the ants) and
Magic/3 (to make the amulet self-powered). The total of all
these levels is 10; therefore, the energy cost is 2,500.

===Draining Enchantment===
In some settings, Realm-wizards can permanently transfer
a portion of their magical power to an item, making
enchantment faster – or perhaps achieving results that
aren’t possible by any other means. Use the rules given in
Spending of Yourself (pp. 109-110). The points required usually
come from a relevant Realm advantage.

==PARAMETERS==
Every syntactic working has a set of parameters: numerical
values and modifiers that define how it takes effect. The
exact form these take can vary from setting to setting; the
GM customizes them to set the flavor of the game. Either
the caster decides beforehand exactly what he wants the
working to do, and this determines modifiers to the skill roll
and/or energy cost, or he makes a skill roll with no modifiers
for this parameter, and the margin of success determines
the working’s power. The former approach makes magic
more reliable and predictable; the latter may grant more
raw power, but with the problem that the precise effectiveness
of any casting is unpredictable.
However, some options – those that must be determined
before attempting the effect – always produce skill modifiers.
For example, if magic normally takes several seconds
to work and involves speaking in a loud voice, then casting
in a hurry and only speaking in a whisper will inevitably
penalize the attempt. Of course, penalties will reduce margin
of success on a successful working.

===Determining Base Energy Cost===
An effect’s base energy cost is usually defined as the energy
needed to affect a single target of SM 0 or less – or the
base area, for an Area effect – instantaneously or for one
standard duration interval. The GM can take this from a
standard spell with a similar effect, or derive it as follows.
Under no circumstances does a syntactic working get an
energy cost reduction for high skill!

====Realm-Based Workings====
The base cost usually equals twice the level of the
highest-level Realm involved, plus the level of any other
Realms used. For example, a delayed-action explosion created
using Fire/3 and Time/1 would have a base cost of (2 x
3) + 1 = 7. If the Realms have few levels that are relatively
broad in scope, then the GM may opt to increase this cost.

===Parameter Effects===
Any parameter can generate a skill penalty or an
increase in the magic’s energy cost, or require a particular
margin of success on the casting roll. Applying both penalties
and energy costs makes useful magic very difficult. The
GM should normally opt for one or the other – or use margin
of success instead of either.
If margin of success does determine certain parameters,
then apply the entire margin separately to each such parameter;
don’t divide it up among them. For example, if the caster’s
effective skill is 15, and he rolls a 9, then the effect can
have 6 points’ worth of range, and 6 points’ worth of area,
and 6 points’ worth of duration, and so on. The magician
never has to use his full margin – if he wants a 10-yarddiameter
effect, then he doesn’t have to let his magic spread
over 100 yards just because he rolled well! For resistible
effects, the GM may opt to subtract the margin of success on
the target’s resistance roll from the caster’s margin, in effect
meaning that such castings use margin of victory.
Effects determined by margin tend to be somewhat
more powerful, but they’re less predictable, and a working’s
power might be greatly reduced if the subject’s resistance
diminishes effective margin. In general, the caster must
define the desired result in fairly specific terms. If he doesn’t
get a large enough margin, then the casting simply fizzles
out – although the GM may permit magicians to leave
some parameters open, to be determined by the margin
rolled.

====Range and Familiarity====
Regular or Area syntactic workings typically take a skill
modifier of -1 per yard of distance to the target or to the
nearest edge of the area of effect. If the GM prefers to
increase energy cost, then such effects cost +1 energy per
two full yards of range; e.g., +3 to cost for a casting at seven
yards. If margin of success determines range, then use the
following table:

{|
|'''Margin of Success'''
|'''Range'''
|-
|0
|Touch Only
|-
|1
|2 Yards
|-
|2
|5 Yards
|-
|3
|10 Yards
|-
|4
|20 Yards
|-
|5
|50 Yards
|-
|6
|100 Yards
|}

Greater margins follow the same “2-5-10” progression.

Melee, Missile, and Blocking effects have no range
parameter; the effect is generated in the caster’s hand or
immediate vicinity. Enchantment effects, too, generally
involve direct contact with the subject – but where the GM
deems it appropriate for these to work at a distance, they
take modifiers as for a Regular effect.
Information effects – and magic incorporating nouns or
Realms such as Distance or Space – can often transcend
distance. In such cases, apply Long-Distance Modifiers
(p. B241) to skill, or change the sign of those penalties to
get increases in energy cost (e.g., casting from three miles
away costs +3 energy). More powerful uses of such magic,
including most applications with results determined by
margin of success, ignore range penalties entirely but
require some degree of familiarity or contact. To determine
the appropriate skill penalty, energy cost, or margin of success,
use these guidelines:


Currently close enough to touch, or in line of sight (if
there’s any doubt, make a Vision+4 roll), or mystical True
Name known: 0.

Close family member, lover, favorite possession, or something
with which the caster has carefully set up a strong mystical
link: 1.

Friend, well-established possession, some mystical connection
established: 2-3.

Place or person the caster can identify by a unique “common
name,” a thing he has handled and studied at length, or
something he can view simultaneously over a television link
or by scrying magic: 4-5.

Casual acquaintance, something handled for a few minutes
in the last week, something with a good photograph
available: 6-8.

Anything clearly identifiable in the same world: 9+.


For something merely vaguely “known of,” the GM can
require a modifier/margin of 10+ or even 20+.


====Extradimensional Range====
Sending magical effects into other dimensions usually
calls for the incorporation of Words or Realms such as Spirit
or Gate. Creating a gate or a portal to another dimension normally
takes no range modifier and requires no margin in itself
– although it may need an area and a duration to be useful –
but it might be harder if the otherworld in question is especially
hard to reach (GM’s option). However, sending a ranged
effect into another plane of existence, other than through an
existing portal, gives -10 to skill or +10 to energy cost, or
requires a margin of success of 5, per dimensional boundary
crossed. Halve these values where planes intersect or intermix
(see Casting Interdimensionally, p. 86). If the target isn’t at a
point corresponding to the caster’s position in the dimension
he presently occupies, then penalties for the ordinary physical
distance covered in the other plane also apply.


====Range in Time====
“Range in time” is a required parameter for magic involving
perception (or possibly travel) through time, whether in
the form of prophecy or precognition, retrocognition, or
“time-slipping.” Such workings must usually incorporate a
suitable noun or Realm; e.g., Time. For skill penalties, use
Long-Distance Modifiers (p. B241), substituting “days” for
“miles.” For energy costs, do the same thing but convert the
negative values into positive extra energy costs. If margin of
success applies, use the following table:


{|
|Margin of Success
|Range in Time
|-
|0 
|Moments Only
|-
|1
|Up to 10 minutes
|-
|2
|Up to 1 hour
|-
|3
|Up to 1 day
|-
|4
|Up to 1 week
|-
|5
|Up to 1 month
|-
|6
|Up to 1 year
|-
|7
|Up to 10 years
|-
|8
|Up to 20 years
|-
|9
|Up to 100 years
|-
|10
|Up to 1,000 years
|}


For larger margins, each +1 multiplies maximum range
in time by a factor of 10.

====Duration====
Extended-duration effects normally have an increased
energy cost rather than a skill penalty; they function like a
standard spell with a maintenance cost. Having set up such
an effect, the caster can keep it going for as long as he can
spare the energy. Temporary but non-instantaneous effects
usually have a base duration of a minute, but the GM may
increase this (to 10 minutes, an hour, or even a day) – especially
if similar spells have greater durations. Optionally, if
temporary effects do require continuing energy input to
maintain, the GM may permit magicians to increase the base
duration by a factor of 10 by taking -5 to skill. Whatever the
duration, the caster can typically maintain a temporary
effect by paying half the casting cost per additional time
increment.

If the GM prefers to use skill modifiers, then the suggested
penalty is -2 per duration interval after the first. Not having
to pay ongoing energy costs to maintain the effect can be
convenient for the caster, but it also means that the magic
will end at the set time. The only way to keep it going for
longer is to recast it.

Some effects are instantaneous, but it may be possible to
convert these into ongoing, temporary effects (e.g., to turn a
flaming blast into a continuously burning flame). Whether
using energy costs or skill modifiers, this gives -2 to skill.
Base duration then becomes 10 seconds.

Other effects are intrinsically “lasting” – they don’t
require maintenance, but continue until some condition is
met (the Bless spell is such an effect). They may still have a
time limit, after which they simply fade. The caster can give
more-temporary effects a similar quality by adding a noun
or a Realm such as Time or Conditionality. For these, see the
Duration Effect Modifiers Table (p. 243) and Variant
Durations: Conditional Termination (p. 242). This sort of
thing should be tricky, possibly having both an energy cost
and a skill penalty. Genuinely permanent effects are effectively
enchantments; rules for this appear where applicable.

If the GM would rather use margin of success to determine
duration, then he should once again consult the
Duration Effect Modifiers Table and Variant Durations:
Conditional Termination rules. Find the modifier there equal
to the margin, and read off the corresponding duration; e.g.,
success by 4 gives a maximum duration of a day. If the
desired effect wasn’t defined as something that could plausibly
endure for this long, then the GM should reduce the
actual duration. Lasting effects may require “fuel” or special
conditions, diminish over time, or fail when supernatural
conditions shift.

====Area of Effect====
Extending an area of effect generally calls for extra energy
rather than a skill penalty. If the effect covers a circular
area, then treat it like an Area spell, multiplying the base
cost by radius in yards. The GM can increase this for especially
powerful or damaging effects, and reduce it significantly
for subtle effects involving large-area phenomena
such as weather or long-term plant growth. For example, a
working that merely creates light rain might have a cost
multiplier equal to the radius affected divided by 20 or even
50; thus, producing rain over a 100-yard radius might cost
only 5¥ or just 2¥ base cost. However, the GM may also
choose to impose skill penalties for huge areas, as even if the
energy is available, it could be hard to channel and stabilize.

If using skill modifiers for all area effects, then the suggested
penalty is -1 per two yards of radius. This, too, can be
increased for especially powerful or damaging effects, and
reduced for subtle effects and large-area phenomena such
as weather. Area Effect Modifiers (p. 242) might apply in
some cases.

When using margin of success, determine the area affected
by treating the margin as a Size Modifier on the Size and
Speed/Range Table (p. B550) and then reading off the corresponding
diameter. For example, success by 6 gives a maximum
diameter of 20 yards.

In all cases, for noncircular areas, use the modifier or
margin for the smallest circle inside which the desired
region could fit completely. Effects designed to conform to
strange or complex shapes may suffer an extra skill penalty
(usually -1 to -3) due to the fine control required.
----

For a circular area of effect, find the circle’s diameter on
the Size and Speed/Range Table (p. B550). If that gives a positive
Size Modifier, use SM as the relevant modifier. Small
areas don’t receive a negative modifier; 0 is the minimum.
For example, areas of 2 yards or less in diameter have a
modifier of 0, an area 30 yards across has a modifier of 7,
and one 25 miles across has a modifier of 26.
For noncircular areas, use the modifier for the smallest
circle into which the area could fit; e.g., a square area 15
yards across the diagonal would have a modifier of 5. For
something like a building that’s taller than it is wide, use
the longest dimension in any direction to determine the
modifier.

====Damage====
For damaging effects, base energy cost with no skill modifier
yields 1d of burning crushing, piercing, or toxic damage.
As with duration and area, the standard way to increase
this parameter is to pay extra energy – not to accept skill
penalties. Simply multiply the base cost by the number of
dice. If the GM prefers to focus on skill modifiers, then he
can give the effect a base -3 to skill per die of damage after
the first. When using margin of success, damage becomes
1d per 2 points or fraction thereof in the margin; a margin
of 0 gives only 1d-2.
For different damage types, multiply the added cost or
the penalty by the values on the Damage Type Table (p. 243),
or divide damage calculated from margin of success by the
same factor. For example, a 3d cutting attack would cost
4.5¥ base value, or take -9 to skill, or drop to 2d if using margin
of success; a 4d small piercing explosive attack would
cost 3¥ base, or give -7 to skill, or increase to 5d+1 if using
margin of success. If the effect delivers multiple shots, then
simply divide damage by RoF; e.g., a 4d attack could
become a 1d attack with RoF 4.

====Healing====
In the case of healing effects, base energy cost with no
skill modifier restores 1d HP. Either multiply energy cost
by the number of dice or take -3 to skill per die after the
first. If using margin of success, then healings repair 1d
HP per 3 points or fraction thereof in the margin, with a
minimum of 1d.

At the GM’s option, certain categories of severe injury
(such as burns) or “magic-defying” wounds (those caused by
silver weapons qualify in some settings) may further
increase the penalties or required margins. These workings
might even require access to different Words or higher levels
in a Realm. If the GM wants to keep healing hard, then
he can reduce all such effects – perhaps halving the number
of dice.

====Personal Abilities====
A successful casting at base energy cost with no skill
modifier can add or remove attributes, secondary characteristics,
advantages, and disadvantages worth a total of 10
character points (positive or negative). If using skill penalties,
apply -1 per additional 5 points of modifications. For
example, lowering or raising the subject’s Basic Speed by 2
would give -6, while granting him Unkillable 1 would be -8.
If using energy costs, simply multiply cost proportionally.
Thus, adjusting the target’s Per by 3 would cost 1.5¥ the
base, while afflicting him with Bad Temper (6) would cost
2¥ the base.

When using margin of success, each point of success
adds or removes traits worth 10 character points, with a
minimum effect of 10 points. Hence, a strengthening effect
that succeeds by 2 can raise the subject’s ST (and thus HP)
by 2, while a curse of stupidity that succeeds by 7 can lower
his IQ (and with it, Per and Will) by 3.

====Weight Affected====
Where the target’s weight is directly related to the magic’s
effectiveness (as is usually the case for telekinetic effects,
teleportation, transmutation of matter, etc.) and the magic
must be cast on the entire target, the basic, unmodified version
should affect up to about 10 lbs. of matter. Working
with smaller quantities gives no benefit. For greater weights,
find the relevant modifier on the Weight Affected Modifiers
Table (p. 243) and treat it as a skill penalty, energy cost
increase, or required margin of success; e.g., 5 tons would
give -6 to skill, cost +6 energy, or require a margin of 6.
Radical transmutations and bizarre effects may have steeper
requirements, perhaps doubling or tripling the value
from the table (GM’s option).

====Multiple Targets====
When an effect can be aimed at many distinct targets,
find the number of targets on the Multiple Target Modifiers
Table (p. 243) and treat the associated modifier as a skill
penalty, energy cost increase, or required margin of success.

====Multiple Elements====
For an especially complex or subtle effect, the GM should
decide how many distinct tasks, commands, or objects it
involves, look up this number on the Multiple Constituent
Modifiers Table (p. 243), and interpret the corresponding
modifier as a skill penalty, extra energy cost, or required
margin of success. For example, assembling a structure
from 20 discrete components, or instilling a mental suggestion
that can influence 20 different actions, would give -6 to
skill, cost +6 energy, or require a margin of 6.


==CASTING TIME==
The base casting time for syntactic magic is largely a
matter of campaign style. Each working may involve an
intricate ritual . . . or a momentary effort of will.
Furthermore, a required practice (see Practices, pp. 192-
193) might take longer than the actual casting. Below are
some general guidelines.

===Verb-Noun Casting Times===
Each Word has an associated time to cast (see Suggested
Verbs and Nouns, p. 185). The working’s base time requirement
is the sum of the casting times for the constituent
Words. Thus, complex workings involving several Words
(e.g., transformations) can take substantially longer than
simple “one verb, one noun” effects. If the same noun
applies to the subject before and after a transformation,
then count it twice. Magic that manipulates the target in
detail, through verbs such as Control, is trickier; double the
time for the affected noun.


===Realm-Based Casting Times===
The suggestion here is seconds equal to (highest-level
Realm employed + 2). For example, a Birds/3, Mind/2 casting
would take five seconds.


===Modifying Casting Time===
It may be possible to adjust casting time through skill
modifiers:

Reduced Casting Time: In many settings, syntactic castings
cannot be rushed. If haste is possible, then the suggested
penalty is -3 per halving of casting time (round time up).
The GM may forbid reductions below one second, or he
might permit this occasionally; e.g., for emergency Blocking
effects. Where such “instant” casting is possible, calculate
the penalty to reduce casting time to one second, and then
apply another -2.

Extra Casting Time: Magicians might be able to work better
by taking longer (GM’s option). The recommended limit
is +1 to skill, requiring at least double casting time.


It usually isn’t possible to change casting time by varying
energy expenditure, but the GM might permit casters to
halve time by adding 50% to energy cost. Conversely, taking
extra time may reduce energy requirements, with each doubling
of time giving -1 to cost, to a minimum of half the
working’s original cost.

===Extended Workings===
An “extended” working is one involving several skill rolls
over a longer-than-usual period, producing a cumulative
effect. This isn’t possible in every setting. If the GM chooses
to allow it, then he should combine it with effects based
on margin of success.

In an extended working, the caster can make repeated
rolls – in effect performing a lengthy, repetitive ritual – until
he accumulates enough effectiveness to do what he wants.
Simply add together the margin of success on each roll,
counting a margin of 0 as 1. If the effect is resistible, then
the subject gets a single roll that’s compared to the total of
all the margins. Thus, extended workings can be difficult to
resist, although good resistance rolls may at least reduce
the magic’s overall effectiveness.

To prevent extended workings from being an easy path
to world-shattering effects, each roll after the first can cost
an extra 1 FP – or even the working’s full energy cost, for a
severely limited version. This caster may have to pay this
added cost out of his FP rather than from external sources;
hammering away at the same problem repeatedly is tiring.
In some settings, castings grow harder with time, too, suffering
a cumulative -1 or -2 to skill per roll. Combined with
the possibility of side effects (see below), this can make
extended workings very chancy!

Another obvious drawback is that, if magic requires
expendable resources, then each roll uses these up.
Multiple rolls also offer extra possibilities for disaster. Any
critical failure spoils the whole attempt (and has its usual
consequences). If using Errors and Side Effects: Reality Bites
Back (pp. 193-194), then each roll faces those risks. The GM
who still feels that this rule makes wizards too powerful
should note that enemies or meddlers can interrupt at any
time, probably scrambling the working – and anyone able
to detect magical forces may be able to identify lengthy
extended rituals from vast distances.

==DISTRACTION==
Syntactic magic is as likely as any other kind – perhaps
more likely – to put demands on the magician’s attention.


===Interruptions===
If someone attacks the caster or otherwise tries to disrupt
the magic while it’s being cast, then Distraction and
Injury (p. B236) applies.


===Casting While Maintaining Other Effects===
The GM may apply the penalties from Casting Spells
While Maintaining Other Spells (p. B238) if the magician
has any other effects, spells, etc., currently active and
requiring any kind of input or attention. He can also rule
that some procedures require the caster’s full attention and
either can’t be cast at all in these circumstances, or take
larger penalties – or that certain effects are self-sustaining,
and cause no actual distraction.