Oceanic Magic
Please Note, this is a GURPS example of Realm Magic.


Wizards are a small but important class in Seafarer society.
A significantly populated island might have two or
three. More than that generally leads to rivalries and jealousy,
driving some of them to follow rumors along the
trade network to a community that needs wizards – or even
to organize an expedition to find a new island where they
can be top dogs.

Seafarer culture values wizards, although it sees them as
a little strange and dangerous. Folktales usually treat them
with respect, but often depict “the wizard’s wife” as a comic
figure, harassed and confused, going through life trying to
ignore all the strangeness around her while seeking to profit
from her husband’s status. There are in fact as many
female as male wizards, but they tend to marry respected
and capable members of their tribes, so there are fewer
jokes about their husbands.

Seafarers use Realm-based syntactic magic (see Chapter
6). Mana as such isn’t a concern, but Magery (Syntactic) is
a prerequisite for magic use, and is always inborn – players
can’t purchase Magery 0 after character creation. Wizards
occasionally manage to sharpen their powers by practice,
advancing from lower levels to Magery 3, but never higher.
The few, legendary Magery 4 wizards are born with that
power, and once their capabilities become clear to themselves,
most become megalomaniacs. Magery adds to
Realm skill.

Wizards identify potential trainees by looking for
strange behaviors and sensitivities in children, and then
confirm their suspicions through a long series of tests.
Most like to have an apprentice or two, and take care to
inculcate loyalty of some sort. Magic makes life complicated
for its users, so it’s desirable to have someone watching
one’s back and assisting with strange activities!

==Realms==

Each Realm is divided into four levels:
*Level 1: Detection and Assessment.
*Level 2: Minor Command.
*Level 3: Minor Creation.
*Level 4: Total Command.

There are five available Realms:
;Weather: Governs wind, waves, and rain, but only grants very limited power over lightning, which is sometimes held to imply divine presence.
;Craft: Relates to all works of the human hand – especially boats and how to sail them.
;Fortune: Encompasses, among other things, curing disease in humans (illness is seen as a form of bad luck) and increases in the rate of healing of physical injuries (a matter of good luck).
;Nature: Takes in animal and plant life, but doesn’t cover humans or their health.
;Land: Grants no power over raw volcanic rock, but otherwise relates to many nonliving phenomena, including freshwater springs.


Water is seen as something whose nature depends on
context. Magic to control it may fall within Weather, Land,
or sometimes Nature.

This schema has three significant gaps. First, fire and
anything directly related to volcanoes are the domain of the
mostly noninterventionist Volcano Gods, the culture’s only
deities. Second, minds, spirits, and souls transcend magic’s
power. Finally, healing magic can’t accomplish anything
beyond the scope of natural processes – although it can
speed these considerably.
Each level within a Realm costs 15 points.

==Parameter Effects==

Parameters affect magic-working as follows:
*Range and familiarity, range in time, damage, and healing generate skill penalties.
*Area of effect, changes to personal abilities, and weight affected modify energy cost.
*Casting against multiple targets generates skill penalties and increases energy cost.
*Base duration of an effect is determined by margin of success. Extended workings aren’t permitted, but it’s possible to maintain a continuing effect for increments of the same duration by spending additional energy equal to half the original casting cost per increment.
* Extradimensional magic isn’t possible in this setting.


There’s no “spirit world” as such. Spirits and gods are
sometimes-intangible beings that dwell in the same physical
world as everyone else.